Sports are termed as any physical or mental activity which is mostly done during leisure time and includes a high level of entertainment involving a sense of competition. Sports are an integral part of everyone’s life and each and every person would have been a part of at least one or the other sports. It not only makes us fit but also makes us alert and active by improving our overall physical and mental health.

Sports also help to spread communal harmony on a larger platform during various global sports events like Olympic, Commonwealth Games, Asian Games etc. Various teams across the world take part in these global events and compete with each other to emerge as a winner. Not only being part of a sport is a wonderful thing but even watching our favorite sports and cheering up for our team is also a great experience.

Types of Sports

Sports can be broadly categorized based on the location or area where it is being played. It could also be further classified on whether it is mind, physical or electronic sports. The major classification of sports is given below:

Outdoor Sports
Sports which require a huge area and are played on a large playground are termed as Outdoor Sports. E.g. – Football, Cricket, Hockey, Rugby etc.

Indoor Sports
Sports or games which can be played within a room, hall or a smaller area are known as Indoor Sports. E.g. – Table Tennis, Badminton, Snooker, Boxing, Chess etc.

The indoor sports could be further classified as mind, physical and electronic. The major classification of Indoor Sports is as follows:

Mind Sports
Sports which does not require much physical exercise is known as Mind Sports. Chess, Card Games etc can be termed as mind sports.

Indoor Physical Sports
Indoor sports which require major physical exertion are known as Indoor Physical Sports. Sports like Badminton, Table Tennis etc are Physical Indoor Sports.

Electronic Sports
This is one of the latest indoor games which involves competition using the video games. The game is played on bigger screens and people compete with each other using their gaming console.

Benefits of Sport

Sport not only has an entertainment factor but it also has many physical and mental health benefits. It enhances the overall personality of an individual by making him fit and active. Some of the major health benefits of playing sports are given below:

Improves Overall Cardiovascular Health
Sports involve exercise which helps our heart to work out and improve the overall cardiovascular system of our body.

Manages Weight
Sports are the best way to burn calories. It is the exercise which gives us enjoyment and manages our weight.

Enhances Muscle Strength
Sport improves our muscular health and makes our bones stronger and improves the flexibility of our body.

Stress Buster
Sport is the best stress buster. It helps to improve our mood and relieves stress. It is the best way to fight depression.

Improves Concentration
Sports make our mind alert and active by improving our concentration. It helps to sharpen focus and elevates self confidence.

Apart from health benefits, sports can also be chosen as a career option. You can work as a trainer, coach, umpire, sports journalist, sports teacher etc. Also for the individuals who excel in their fields can participate in various national and international sports events and bring pride to the country by their performance and emerging as a winner. There had been many sportsperson in India who brought pride to our nation by their exceptional performance in international sports events and earned medals and trophies for the country.

What is Sportsmanship

Sportsmanship or Sportsman Spirit is showcasing a conduct of playing fair and accepting victory or defeat in a very graceful manner. It can be defined as having a sense of respect towards the opponent, following the rules of the game, giving respect to the decision of the referee or the officials etc. Sportsmanship makes the person accept his victory in a very positive and mature way without humiliating the opponent. Sportsmanship is not only to be showcased on the field but it has to be also carried throughout the life. It helps to appreciate people for their hard work and contributions and also showcasing a positive attitude and being respectful to others.

Conclusion

A healthy mind resides in a healthy body and outdoor sport is the best fitness option for the people who don’t have time to go to the gym or to exercise. It is also helpful for the people who are mostly involved in desk jobs and do very less physical movement during work. Sports also help to fight stress which is very common nowadays in every field. It cheers you up and lifts your mood elevating your self esteem and confidence. It teaches us discipline, value of time and team spirit which helps us to beat every challenge and achieve success in our life. Sport enhances the overall personality of a person and makes him smart, productive and focused.